'''Balrogs''' (Sindarin: "demons of might"), known in Quenya as '''Valaraukar''', are ancient and terrible demons of fire and shadow in the legendarium of [[J. R. R. Tolkien]]. They are corrupted [[Istari|Maiar]] who entered the service of [[Morgoth]] in the earliest days of the world.

== Origins ==
The Balrogs were originally [[Istari|Maiar]] — spirits of the same order as [[Sauron]] and [[Gandalf]] — who were seduced and corrupted by [[Morgoth]] (Melkor) before the awakening of the [[Elves]]. They became beings of fire wreathed in shadow and darkness, wielding whips of flame and radiating terror. Their exact number is debated; Tolkien's later writings suggest there were at most seven.

== Appearance ==
Balrogs are described as great figures of shadow and flame. They are man-shaped but far larger, and darkness clings to them like a cloak. They carry weapons of fire — swords of flame and many-thonged whips. Whether they possess literal wings is one of the most debated questions in Tolkien scholarship; the text describes "shadow about it like two vast wings" but this may be metaphorical.

== First Age ==
Balrogs served as [[Morgoth]]'s most feared warriors and captains throughout the wars of the [[Middle-earth|First Age]]. Notable deeds include:
* '''Gothmog''', Lord of Balrogs, slew the Elven High King Fëanor and later killed Fingon, High King of the Noldor, at the Battle of Unnumbered Tears.
* Balrogs fought in the Fall of Gondolin, the hidden Elven city, where Gothmog was slain by Ecthelion of the Fountain (both perished).
* A Balrog slew Glorfindel during the flight from Gondolin, though both fell to their deaths.

Most Balrogs were destroyed in the War of Wrath at the end of the First Age, when the Valar overthrew Morgoth. A few survived by hiding deep beneath the mountains.

== Durin's Bane ==
The most famous surviving Balrog is '''Durin's Bane''', which slumbered deep beneath the [[Misty Mountains]] in the ancient [[Dwarves|Dwarf]] kingdom of Khazad-dûm ([[Moria]]). In T.A. 1980, the [[Dwarves]] delved too deep in search of mithril and awakened the Balrog. It killed King Durin VI and his son Náin I, and the Dwarves were driven from [[Moria]], which became a place of dread.

== The Bridge of Khazad-dûm ==
When the [[Fellowship of the Ring]] passed through [[Moria]] in T.A. 3019, they encountered Durin's Bane. [[Gandalf]] stood alone on the Bridge of Khazad-dûm to confront the creature, declaring: "You cannot pass! I am a servant of the Secret Fire, wielder of the flame of Anor. You cannot pass. The dark fire will not avail you, flame of Udûn. Go back to the Shadow!"

Gandalf broke the bridge beneath the Balrog, but as it fell, the Balrog's whip caught Gandalf and dragged him into the abyss. The two fought as they fell — through water and caverns deep beneath the mountain — and then climbed from the deepest dungeon to the peak of [[Misty Mountains|Zirakzigil]] (Celebdil), where they battled for two days and nights.

Gandalf slew the Balrog at last but died from his wounds and exhaustion. He was sent back by the Valar as '''Gandalf the White''', with greater power and authority.

== See Also ==
* [[Gandalf]]
* [[Moria]]
* [[Morgoth]]
* [[Fellowship of the Ring]]

[[Category:Characters]]
