'''Boromir''' is a Man of [[Gondor]] and a member of the [[Fellowship of the Ring]] in ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'' by [[J. R. R. Tolkien]]. The eldest son of Denethor II, Steward of [[Gondor]], he is a proud and valiant warrior whose tragic downfall and redemption form one of the story's most powerful arcs.

== Background ==
Boromir was born in T.A. 2978, the elder son of Denethor II, the ruling Steward of [[Gondor]], and brother of [[Faramir]]. He was Captain of the White Tower and the most celebrated warrior of [[Gondor]] in his time. Boromir grew up defending [[Gondor]] against the constant threat of [[Mordor]] and believed deeply that the strength of Men was the only hope against [[Sauron]].

== Journey to Rivendell ==
Boromir travelled to [[Rivendell]] after both he and [[Faramir]] received a prophetic dream bidding them to "seek for the Sword that was broken" in Imladris. As the elder brother, Boromir insisted on making the long and perilous journey north. He arrived at the [[Council of Elrond]] and argued that the [[One Ring]] should be used as a weapon against [[Sauron]], rather than destroyed. He was overruled, but he joined the [[Fellowship of the Ring]] to represent [[Gondor]] and protect [[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]].

== Fellowship Member ==
Boromir was a stalwart companion throughout the Fellowship's journey. He fought bravely in [[Moria]] and showed tenderness, teaching [[Meriadoc Brandybuck|Merry]] and [[Peregrin Took|Pippin]] swordplay during the journey. However, the [[One Ring]] worked on him steadily, feeding his despair about [[Gondor]]'s survival and his desire to use its power to save his people.

== Temptation by the Ring ==
At [[Amon Hen]], Boromir confronted [[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]] alone and demanded the Ring, arguing that it was folly to cast it away when it could save [[Gondor]]. When Frodo refused, Boromir tried to take it by force. Frodo escaped by putting on the Ring and fleeing. Boromir immediately came to his senses and was horrified by what he had done.

This moment precipitated the breaking of the Fellowship: Frodo decided to continue to [[Mordor]] alone (with [[Samwise Gamgee|Sam]] following), and [[Meriadoc Brandybuck|Merry]] and [[Peregrin Took|Pippin]] were captured by [[Saruman]]'s Uruk-hai.

== Redemption and Death ==
When the Uruk-hai attacked, Boromir fought to defend [[Meriadoc Brandybuck|Merry]] and [[Peregrin Took|Pippin]], blowing the great Horn of Gondor to summon aid. He was pierced by many arrows but continued fighting until he fell. [[Aragorn]] found him dying. Boromir confessed his attempt to take the Ring and declared Aragorn his king:

: "I tried to take the Ring from Frodo. I am sorry. I have paid."

Aragorn, [[Legolas]], and [[Gimli]] placed his body in one of the Elven boats and sent it over the Falls of Rauros. His horn, cloven in two, was later found by his father Denethor and brother [[Faramir]].

Boromir's death is one of the most moving passages in ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'', demonstrating both the Ring's corrupting power and the capacity for redemption through sacrifice.

== See Also ==
* [[Faramir]]
* [[Gondor]]
* [[Fellowship of the Ring]]
* [[Aragorn]]
* [[One Ring]]

[[Category:Characters]]
