'''The Fellowship of the Ring''' is the company of nine formed at the [[Council of Elrond]] in [[Rivendell]] to accompany [[Frodo Baggins]] on his quest to destroy the [[One Ring]] in the fires of [[Mount Doom]] in [[Mordor]]. The Fellowship represents the free peoples of [[Middle-earth]] united against [[Sauron]].

== Formation ==
At the [[Council of Elrond]], after [[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]] volunteered to carry the [[One Ring]], [[Elrond]] chose eight companions to aid him, matching the nine [[Nazgûl|Ringwraiths]] in number:

# '''[[Frodo Baggins]]''' — the Ring-bearer, a [[Hobbits|Hobbit]] of [[The Shire]].
# '''[[Samwise Gamgee]]''' — Frodo's gardener and closest friend.
# '''[[Meriadoc Brandybuck]]''' (Merry) — a [[Hobbits|Hobbit]], cousin of Frodo.
# '''[[Peregrin Took]]''' (Pippin) — a [[Hobbits|Hobbit]], youngest of the company.
# '''[[Gandalf]]''' — the Grey Wizard, guide and counsellor.
# '''[[Aragorn]]''' — Ranger of the North, heir of Isildur.
# '''[[Legolas]]''' — [[Elves|Elf]] prince of [[Mirkwood]].
# '''[[Gimli]]''' — [[Dwarves|Dwarf]], son of [[Glóin]].
# '''[[Boromir]]''' — Man of [[Gondor]], son of the Steward Denethor II.

== Journey ==

=== Rivendell to Moria ===
The Fellowship departed [[Rivendell]] on 25 December T.A. 3018. They attempted to cross the [[Misty Mountains]] via the pass of Caradhras but were turned back by blizzards (possibly sent by [[Sauron]] or [[Saruman]]). They then entered the [[Mines of Moria]], the ancient [[Dwarves|Dwarf]] kingdom of Khazad-dûm.

=== Moria ===
In [[Moria]], the Fellowship found the tomb of [[Gimli]]'s kinsman Balin and a record of the Dwarven colony's destruction. They were attacked by Orcs and a cave-troll. At the Bridge of Khazad-dûm, [[Gandalf]] confronted a [[Balrog]] — Durin's Bane — and fell with it into the abyss, buying the others time to escape. The loss of Gandalf devastated the company.

=== Lothlórien ===
The Fellowship found refuge in [[Lothlórien]], the golden forest of [[Galadriel]] and [[Celeborn]]. There they rested, received counsel, and were given gifts and Elven boats for the journey south along the [[Anduin]].

=== Amon Hen ===
At [[Amon Hen]] (the Hill of Sight) above the Falls of Rauros, the Fellowship broke apart:
* [[Boromir]], corrupted by the Ring's influence, tried to take it from [[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]] by force.
* Frodo decided to continue to [[Mordor]] alone; [[Samwise Gamgee|Sam]] followed.
* [[Saruman]]'s Uruk-hai attacked. [[Boromir]] died defending [[Meriadoc Brandybuck|Merry]] and [[Peregrin Took|Pippin]], who were captured.

== Breaking of the Fellowship ==
The breaking of the Fellowship at Amon Hen split the company into three groups, each pursuing a different path:

=== Frodo and Sam ===
[[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]] and [[Samwise Gamgee|Sam]] travelled into [[Mordor]] with [[Gollum]] as their guide, ultimately reaching [[Mount Doom]] and destroying the [[One Ring]].

=== Aragorn, Legolas, and Gimli ===
[[Aragorn]], [[Legolas]], and [[Gimli]] pursued the Uruk-hai into [[Rohan]], reunited with [[Gandalf]] (returned as Gandalf the White), fought at [[Rohan|Helm's Deep]], and led the Host of the West to the [[Black Gate]].

=== Merry and Pippin ===
[[Meriadoc Brandybuck|Merry]] and [[Peregrin Took|Pippin]] escaped captivity and met [[Treebeard]] in [[Fangorn]] Forest, persuading the [[Ents]] to march on [[Isengard]]. Later, Pippin entered the service of Denethor in [[Minas Tirith]], and Merry rode with [[Éowyn]] to the [[Pelennor Fields]], where he helped slay the [[Nazgûl|Witch-king]].

== Legacy ==
Though the Fellowship was broken, its members' separate journeys all contributed to the defeat of [[Sauron]]. The bonds forged during their time together endured for the rest of their lives, and the Fellowship's story became legendary in the [[Middle-earth|Fourth Age]].

== See Also ==
* [[Council of Elrond]]
* [[One Ring]]
* [[Lord of the Rings]]
* [[Rivendell]]

[[Category:Works]]
