'''Galadriel''' (Sindarin: "maiden crowned with a radiant garland") is one of the most ancient and powerful [[Elves]] in [[Middle-earth]] and the Lady of [[Lothlórien]] in ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'' by [[J. R. R. Tolkien]]. She is among the last of the great Elves who were born in the [[Undying Lands]] and remember the light of the Two Trees of Valinor.

== Origins ==
Galadriel was born in Valinor during the [[Middle-earth|First Age]], the daughter of Finarfin and granddaughter of Finwë, High King of the Noldor. She was exceptionally tall, beautiful, and wise, with golden hair said to capture the mingled light of the Two Trees — gold and silver together. The legendary Elven-smith Fëanor asked her three times for a strand of her hair and was refused each time; this makes [[Gimli]]'s later request and her gift of three strands especially significant.

Galadriel participated in the rebellion of the Noldor and their exile from Valinor, crossing the Grinding Ice to [[Middle-earth]]. She was the only female leader of the Noldorin rebellion who survived all three ages in Middle-earth.

== History Across the Ages ==
In the [[Middle-earth|First Age]], Galadriel dwelt in various Elven realms, including Doriath under King Thingol. She married [[Celeborn]], a Sindarin Elf lord, and their daughter Celebrían later married [[Elrond]].

In the [[Middle-earth|Second Age]], Galadriel and [[Celeborn]] established [[Lothlórien]]. She rejected [[Sauron]] when he came to the Elven-smiths of Eregion disguised as Annatar, seeing through his fair form. She was one of the few who recognised his true nature.

Throughout the [[Middle-earth|Third Age]], Galadriel maintained [[Lothlórien]] as a bastion of Elven culture and power, a timeless realm preserved by her Ring.

== The Mirror of Galadriel ==
Galadriel possesses a basin called the '''Mirror''' — a shallow silver basin filled with water from a stream — that shows visions of past, present, and possible futures. She warns those who look that "the Mirror shows many things, and not all have yet come to pass." She showed the Mirror to [[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]] and [[Samwise Gamgee|Sam]] during the [[Fellowship of the Ring|Fellowship]]'s stay in [[Lothlórien]].

== Nenya ==
Galadriel bears '''Nenya''', the Ring of Water, one of the Three [[Rings of Power|Elven Rings]] forged by Celebrimbor without [[Sauron]]'s direct touch. Nenya's power preserves [[Lothlórien]] from decay, keeping it a living memory of the Elder Days. The Ring is made of mithril set with a white stone, and its power would fade if the [[One Ring]] were destroyed — a sacrifice Galadriel accepts knowingly.

== The Temptation Test ==
In one of the most significant scenes in ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'', [[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]] offers the [[One Ring]] to Galadriel freely. She is tempted and shows Frodo a vision of what she could become with its power — "beautiful and terrible as the Morning and the Night... All shall love me and despair!" — a terrible queen, radiant and dreadful.

But she refuses the Ring, saying: "I pass the test. I will diminish, and go into the West, and remain Galadriel."

This moment demonstrates that the defeat of [[Sauron]] requires the greatest of the Elves to accept their own diminishment. Galadriel chooses to let the age of the Elves end rather than seize power.

== Departure to the Undying Lands ==
After the destruction of the [[One Ring]], Galadriel departed [[Middle-earth]] from the [[Grey Havens]], travelling to the [[Undying Lands]] with [[Elrond]], [[Gandalf]], [[Bilbo Baggins|Bilbo]], and [[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]]. Her departure marks the end of the great Elven presence in [[Middle-earth]] and the beginning of the [[Middle-earth|Fourth Age]], the Dominion of Men.

== See Also ==
* [[Lothlórien]]
* [[Celeborn]]
* [[One Ring]]
* [[Elrond]]
* [[Fellowship of the Ring]]

[[Category:Characters]]
