'''Gimli''', son of [[Glóin]], is a [[Dwarves|Dwarf]] lord and a member of the [[Fellowship of the Ring]] in ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'' by [[J. R. R. Tolkien]]. He represents the Dwarven race in the quest to destroy the [[One Ring]].

== Background ==
Gimli is the son of Glóin, one of the thirteen Dwarves who accompanied [[Bilbo Baggins]] on the quest to reclaim Erebor (the Lonely Mountain) in ''[[The Hobbit]]''. Gimli was born in T.A. 2879, making him 139 years old at the time of the [[War of the Ring]]. He came to [[Rivendell]] with his father to warn [[Elrond]] that a messenger of [[Sauron]] had come to Erebor seeking news of [[Bilbo Baggins|Bilbo]] and the [[One Ring]].

== Member of the Fellowship ==
At the [[Council of Elrond]], Gimli was chosen to represent the [[Dwarves]] in the [[Fellowship of the Ring]]. He initially harboured deep suspicion of [[Elves]], particularly [[Legolas]], reflecting the ancient grudge between their races dating back to the imprisonment of the Dwarves by Thranduil in ''[[The Hobbit]]''.

Gimli wielded a battle-axe and proved himself a formidable warrior. In [[Moria]], he was devastated to discover the tomb of his kinsman Balin and the record of the Dwarven colony's destruction.

== Friendship with Legolas ==
Gimli's unlikely friendship with [[Legolas]] is one of the great themes of the story. The turning point came in [[Lothlórien]], where Gimli was deeply moved by the beauty of [[Galadriel]]. He asked her for a single strand of her golden hair as a gift — a request that recalled the ancient Silmaril legend, since Fëanor had once asked the same and been refused. Galadriel gave Gimli three strands, and from that moment his devotion to her transformed his view of the Elves entirely.

At [[Rohan|Helm's Deep]], Gimli and Legolas famously counted their kills in friendly competition. Gimli claimed forty-two to Legolas's forty-one (the numbers vary slightly between versions).

== Battles ==
Gimli fought with distinction throughout the [[War of the Ring]]:
* The Battle of the Chamber of Mazarbul in [[Moria]]
* The Battle of [[Rohan|Helm's Deep]], where he fought in the Glittering Caves
* The Paths of the Dead alongside [[Aragorn]]
* The Battle of the [[Pelennor Fields]]
* The Battle of the [[Black Gate]]

== After the War ==
After the war, Gimli became Lord of the Glittering Caves at [[Rohan|Helm's Deep]], leading a colony of [[Dwarves]] who did great works of stonecraft there and in [[Minas Tirith]], including new gates of mithril and steel for the city.

After King [[Aragorn|Elessar]]'s death in Fo.A. 120, [[Legolas]] sailed to the [[Undying Lands]] and took Gimli with him. Gimli was the only [[Dwarves|Dwarf]] ever granted this passage, a testament to his friendship with Legolas and his devotion to [[Galadriel]].

== See Also ==
* [[Legolas]]
* [[Fellowship of the Ring]]
* [[Galadriel]]
* [[Moria]]

[[Category:Characters]]
[[Category:Dwarves]]
