{{Infobox character
| name = Gollum (Sméagol)
| race = [[Hobbits|Hobbit]] (Stoor)
| birth = c. T.A. 2430
| death = 25 March, T.A. 3019
| titles = None
| affiliation = None (guided [[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]] and [[Samwise Gamgee|Sam]])
}}
'''Gollum''', originally known as '''Sméagol''', is a central figure in ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'' and ''[[The Hobbit]]'' by [[J. R. R. Tolkien]]. Once a [[Hobbits|Hobbit]]-like creature of the Stoor branch, he was corrupted by the [[One Ring]] over nearly five centuries and became the wretched, split-personalitied being obsessed with his "Precious."

== Finding the Ring ==
Around T.A. 2463, Sméagol was fishing with his cousin Déagol in the Gladden Fields near the river [[Anduin]] when Déagol found the [[One Ring]] on the river bottom. Sméagol immediately desired it and strangled Déagol to take it. This act of murder upon first contact with the Ring marked the beginning of his transformation.

== Transformation ==
Sméagol was banished by his family for his increasingly secretive and malicious behaviour. He retreated into the tunnels beneath the [[Misty Mountains]], where he lived for nearly 500 years. The Ring extended his life far beyond its natural span but twisted him physically and mentally. He became emaciated, pale, and adapted to darkness, feeding on raw fish and goblins. He developed the habit of making a swallowing noise in his throat — "gollum, gollum" — which became his name.

His personality split into two warring selves: '''Sméagol''', who retained traces of his original hobbit nature and capacity for affection, and '''Gollum''', the Ring-obsessed creature consumed by greed and treachery.

== Encounter with Bilbo ==
In T.A. 2941, [[Bilbo Baggins]] stumbled into Gollum's cave during the events of ''[[The Hobbit]]''. They engaged in a riddle contest, which Bilbo won (somewhat questionably) by asking "What have I got in my pocket?" — having already found the Ring. Gollum, realising the Ring was lost, flew into a rage, but Bilbo escaped using the Ring's invisibility.

The loss of the Ring drove Gollum out of the mountains for the first time in centuries. He was eventually captured and tortured by [[Sauron]]'s servants in [[Mordor]], revealing the names "Baggins" and "Shire" — which set the [[Nazgûl]] on their hunt.

== Tracking the Fellowship ==
After escaping [[Mordor]] and being briefly captured by the [[Elves]] of [[Mirkwood]] (from whose custody he escaped), Gollum followed the [[Fellowship of the Ring]] from [[Moria]] onward, tracking them by scent and stealth.

== Guiding Frodo and Sam ==
After the breaking of the Fellowship, [[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]] and [[Samwise Gamgee|Sam]] captured Gollum and forced him to guide them to [[Mordor]]. Frodo made Gollum swear an oath on the Ring itself. For a time, the Sméagol personality dominated, and Gollum seemed genuinely attached to Frodo, who showed him kindness. Sam, however, never trusted him, and the tension between them pushed Gollum back toward treachery.

Tolkien noted that Gollum came very close to repentance — a moment when he returned to find Frodo sleeping and nearly reached out in tenderness — but Sam's harsh words broke the spell.

== Betrayal at Cirith Ungol ==
Gollum led Frodo and Sam into the lair of Shelob, the great spider, at [[Cirith Ungol]], hoping she would kill them and he could reclaim the Ring from the remains. The plan partly succeeded — Shelob paralysed Frodo — but Sam drove her off with the light of [[Galadriel]]'s phial and Sting.

== Destruction of the Ring ==
Gollum reappeared at the Crack of Doom inside [[Mount Doom]] at the climax of the story. When Frodo, overcome by the Ring's power, claimed it for himself and refused to cast it into the fire, Gollum attacked and bit the Ring from Frodo's finger. In his ecstasy at reclaiming his Precious, Gollum danced on the edge and fell into the volcanic fire, destroying the [[One Ring]] and [[Sauron]] with it.

Thus Gollum, through his obsession, fulfilled the role that [[Gandalf]] had foreseen — that he had "some part to play yet, for good or ill, before this is over." The Ring was destroyed not by heroic will but by mercy and providence.

== See Also ==
* [[One Ring]]
* [[Frodo Baggins]]
* [[Bilbo Baggins]]
* [[Samwise Gamgee]]

[[Category:Characters]]
[[Category:Hobbits]]
