'''Legolas''' is an [[Elves|Elf]] of the Woodland Realm of [[Mirkwood]] and a member of the [[Fellowship of the Ring]] in ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'' by [[J. R. R. Tolkien]]. He is the son of Thranduil, King of the Silvan Elves of northern Mirkwood.

== Background ==
Legolas is a Sindarin Elf, a prince of the Woodland Realm. His exact age is never stated, but as an Elf he is likely several thousand years old. He was sent to [[Rivendell]] by his father to report on the escape of [[Gollum]] from the Elves' custody, and he attended the [[Council of Elrond]].

== Member of the Fellowship ==
Legolas was chosen to represent the Elves in the [[Fellowship of the Ring]]. His Elven abilities — keen eyesight, light-footedness (he could walk on snow without leaving prints), and deadly accuracy with a bow — made him an invaluable companion. He served as a scout and ranged fighter throughout the journey.

In [[Moria]], Legolas recognised the [[Balrog]] as a creature of ancient terror and fought alongside the Fellowship during their escape. In [[Lothlórien]], he was at home among the [[Galadriel|Galadhrim]], and [[Galadriel]] gave him a great bow of the Galadhrim as a gift.

== Friendship with Gimli ==
The friendship between Legolas and [[Gimli]] is one of the most celebrated relationships in the story. Despite the ancient enmity between Elves and [[Dwarves]], the two forged a deep bond through shared danger. Their friendship began tentatively in [[Lothlórien]] — where Gimli's reverence for [[Galadriel]] surprised and moved Legolas — and deepened through the battles that followed.

They often engaged in a competitive tally of enemies slain, particularly at [[Rohan|Helm's Deep]], where Gimli narrowly bested Legolas's count. Their friendship became legendary as an example of reconciliation between the two races.

== Battles ==
Legolas fought in several major engagements during the [[War of the Ring]]:
* The defence of [[Amon Hen]]
* The Battle of [[Rohan|Helm's Deep]]
* The Battle of the [[Pelennor Fields]]
* The Battle of the [[Black Gate]] (Morannon)

He also accompanied [[Aragorn]] on the Paths of the Dead and helped him summon the Dead Men of Dunharrow.

== The Sea-longing and Departure ==
During the Battle of the Pelennor Fields, Legolas heard the cry of gulls and was seized by the Elven "sea-longing" — a deep desire to sail west to the [[Undying Lands]]. After the [[War of the Ring]], Legolas brought a company of Silvan Elves to [[Gondor]], where they helped restore the land of Ithilien.

After King [[Aragorn|Elessar]]'s death in Fo.A. 120, Legolas built a grey ship and sailed to the [[Undying Lands]], taking [[Gimli]] with him — the only [[Dwarves|Dwarf]] ever to be granted passage.

== See Also ==
* [[Gimli]]
* [[Fellowship of the Ring]]
* [[Aragorn]]

[[Category:Characters]]
