'''Lothlórien''' (Sindarin: "Lórien of the Blossom"), also called '''Lórien''' or the '''Golden Wood''', is an Elven forest realm in [[Middle-earth]] in ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'' by [[J. R. R. Tolkien]]. It is ruled by [[Galadriel]] and [[Celeborn]] and is the fairest and most enchanted of the Elven realms remaining in the [[Middle-earth|Third Age]].

== Description ==
Lothlórien lies between the rivers Celebrant (Silverlode) and [[Anduin]], east of the [[Misty Mountains]], near the entrance to [[Moria]]. The forest is composed of '''mallorn''' trees — great trees with silver bark and golden leaves that do not fall until spring, when new gold leaves replace them. The Elves dwell on platforms called '''flets''' (''telain'') built high in the mallorn branches.

The heart of Lothlórien is '''Caras Galadhon''', the city of the trees, where [[Galadriel]] and [[Celeborn]] dwell. The forest is protected by the power of [[Galadriel]]'s ring '''Nenya''' (the Ring of Water), which preserves it from decay and the passage of time. To visitors, the forest feels timeless — the Fellowship could not tell how long they had stayed.

== Galadriel and Celeborn ==
'''[[Galadriel]]''' is one of the most ancient and powerful Elves in [[Middle-earth]], born in Valinor in the [[Middle-earth|First Age]]. '''[[Celeborn]]''' is a Sindarin Elf lord. Together they have governed Lothlórien since the beginning of the [[Middle-earth|Third Age]], making it a bastion of Elven culture and power.

== The Fellowship's Stay ==
After the fall of [[Gandalf]] in [[Moria]], the [[Fellowship of the Ring]] came to Lothlórien, where they were received by [[Galadriel]] and [[Celeborn]]. The Elves mourned Gandalf and gave the Fellowship rest, healing, and counsel.

During their stay, [[Galadriel]] showed [[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]] and [[Samwise Gamgee|Sam]] her '''Mirror''' — a basin of water that reveals visions of the past, present, and possible futures. Frodo saw the Eye of [[Sauron]] searching for him and offered the [[One Ring]] to Galadriel (see below).

== Gifts Given ==
Upon the Fellowship's departure, [[Galadriel]] gave each member a gift:
* '''[[Aragorn]]''' — a sheath for [[Narsil|Andúril]] and the Elfstone (Elessar), a green jewel.
* '''[[Boromir]]''' — a belt of gold.
* '''[[Legolas]]''' — a bow of the Galadhrim.
* '''[[Gimli]]''' — three strands of her golden hair.
* '''[[Meriadoc Brandybuck|Merry]]''' and '''[[Peregrin Took|Pippin]]''' — silver belts.
* '''[[Samwise Gamgee|Sam]]''' — a box of soil from Lothlórien with a mallorn seed.
* '''[[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]]''' — the Phial of Galadriel, containing the light of Eärendil's star.

The Fellowship also received Elven cloaks, lembas (waybread), and boats for their journey down the [[Anduin]].

== The Mirror of Galadriel ==
The Mirror is one of Lothlórien's most mysterious features. [[Galadriel]] warns that it shows "things that were, and things that are, and things that yet may be." Both [[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]] and [[Samwise Gamgee|Sam]] look into it. Sam sees the Shire being industrialised (a foreshadowing of the [[The Shire|Scouring]]), and Frodo sees the Eye of [[Sauron]].

== Fading After the War ==
With the destruction of the [[One Ring]], the power of [[Galadriel]]'s ring Nenya faded, and the enchantment that preserved Lothlórien diminished. [[Galadriel]] departed [[Middle-earth]] for the [[Undying Lands]]. [[Celeborn]] remained for a time but eventually also departed. The fate of Lothlórien in the [[Middle-earth|Fourth Age]] is one of gradual fading, as the Elves departed and the mallorn trees slowly gave way to ordinary forest.

== See Also ==
* [[Galadriel]]
* [[Fellowship of the Ring]]
* [[Moria]]
* [[Middle-earth]]

[[Category:Places]]
