{{Infobox place
| name = Minas Tirith
| type = Fortified city
| location = Eastern [[Gondor]], at the foot of [[Mount Mindolluin]]
| ruler = Stewards of Gondor, later King [[Aragorn|Elessar]]
| inhabitants = Men of [[Gondor]]
| founded = S.A. 3320 (as Minas Anor)
| events = [[Battle of the Pelennor Fields]], Coronation of [[Aragorn]]
| realm = [[Gondor]]
}}
'''Minas Tirith''' (Sindarin: "Tower of Guard"), originally called '''Minas Anor''' ("Tower of the Sun"), is the capital city of [[Gondor]] and the greatest fortress of Men in [[Middle-earth]] in ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'' by [[J. R. R. Tolkien]].

== Description ==
Minas Tirith is built on seven levels carved into the hill of [[Mount Mindolluin]], each level rising above the last and enclosed by a white wall. A great spur of rock, the "keel," thrusts forward from the hill through all seven levels, so that each gate faces a different direction from the one below. The first wall, the Great Gate, is made of steel and iron.

At the summit stands the '''Citadel''' and the '''White Tower of Ecthelion''', visible for miles, gleaming in the sun. Before the Tower stands the withered '''White Tree of Gondor''', a descendant of Telperion, one of the Two Trees of Valinor. The tree's flowering is a sign of the rightful king's return.

== History ==
Minas Anor was founded at the end of the [[Middle-earth|Second Age]] by Anárion, son of Elendil, as the companion city to Minas Ithil (later [[Minas Morgul]]). When Minas Ithil was captured by the [[Nazgûl]] in T.A. 2002, Minas Anor was renamed Minas Tirith — the Tower of Guard — as the chief bulwark against [[Mordor]].

For centuries, the city was ruled by the Stewards of [[Gondor]] in the absence of a king. By the time of the [[War of the Ring]], Denethor II served as Steward, with his sons [[Boromir]] and [[Faramir]] as military commanders.

== The White Tree ==
The White Tree of Gondor stands in the Court of the Fountain before the Citadel. By the time of the [[War of the Ring]], the tree was dead and withered, symbolising the decline of [[Gondor]]. After the war, [[Aragorn]] found a sapling of the White Tree on the slopes of [[Mount Mindolluin]], and the new tree was planted in the court as a sign of renewal.

== The Battle of the Pelennor Fields ==
During the [[War of the Ring]], [[Sauron]]'s armies besieged Minas Tirith. [[Gandalf]] organised the city's defence while Denethor fell into despair and madness, eventually attempting to burn himself and [[Faramir]] alive on a pyre. [[Gandalf]] and [[Peregrin Took|Pippin]] rescued Faramir, but Denethor perished.

The [[Nazgûl|Witch-king]] broke the Great Gate, but [[Gandalf]] confronted him. The siege was broken by the arrival of the [[Rohan|Rohirrim]] under King [[Théoden]], and the ensuing Battle of the [[Pelennor Fields]] was the greatest battle of the [[War of the Ring]]. [[Théoden]] was slain, and [[Éowyn]] and [[Meriadoc Brandybuck|Merry]] together destroyed the Witch-king.

The tide was turned when [[Aragorn]] arrived with reinforcements from southern [[Gondor]] aboard the Corsair ships, having summoned the Dead Men of Dunharrow.

== Aragorn's Coronation ==
After the destruction of the [[One Ring]] and the defeat of [[Sauron]], [[Aragorn]] was crowned King Elessar before the gates of Minas Tirith. He married [[Arwen]], daughter of [[Elrond]], and restored the line of kings. Minas Tirith became the capital of the Reunited Kingdom of Arnor and [[Gondor]].

== See Also ==
* [[Gondor]]
* [[Aragorn]]
* [[Pelennor Fields]]
* [[Théoden]]
* [[Éowyn]]

[[Category:Places]]
