'''The Nazgûl''' (Black Speech: "Ringwraiths"), also called the '''Nine''', the '''Black Riders''', or the '''Úlairi''', are the most feared servants of [[Sauron]] in ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'' by [[J. R. R. Tolkien]]. They are the nine mortal kings of Men who were enslaved by the [[Rings of Power]] and became undead wraiths bound to the [[One Ring]].

== Origins ==
In the [[Middle-earth|Second Age]], [[Sauron]] distributed nine of the [[Rings of Power]] to great lords and kings of Men. The rings granted them power, wealth, and extended life, but gradually enslaved their wills to Sauron. Over time, they faded from the physical world entirely, becoming invisible wraiths existing perpetually in the shadow-realm. They became neither living nor dead — bound to [[Sauron]] through the [[One Ring]] and utterly subject to his will.

== Abilities ==
The Nazgûl possess several terrifying powers:
* '''The Black Breath''' — their mere presence induces dread, despair, and a deadly cold. Prolonged exposure can cause a victim to fall into a coma (the "Black Shadow").
* '''Invisibility''' — they are invisible in the physical world; only their black robes and armour give them form. In the wraith-world, they appear as tall, pale kings with burning eyes.
* '''Morgul-blades''' — enchanted knives that break off in the wound and work toward the victim's heart, threatening to turn them into a wraith under Sauron's control. [[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]] was stabbed by one on [[Weathertop]].
* '''Fell beasts''' — in the later stages of the [[War of the Ring]], the Nazgûl rode winged creatures (unnamed reptilian beasts) rather than horses.
* '''Sorcery''' — they are powerful sorcerers, and their leader is among the most dangerous beings in [[Middle-earth]].

== The Witch-king of Angmar ==
The '''Witch-king''' is the lord of the Nazgûl and [[Sauron]]'s chief captain. In the [[Middle-earth|Third Age]], he established the kingdom of Angmar in the north and spent centuries waging war against the successor kingdoms of Arnor, eventually destroying them. He later captured [[Minas Morgul]] (formerly Minas Ithil) and made it the Nazgûl's base.

An ancient prophecy by the Elf-lord Glorfindel declared that the Witch-king would "not fall by the hand of man."

== Pursuit of Frodo ==
At the start of ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'', [[Sauron]] sent the Nazgûl to find the [[One Ring]], having learned the names "Baggins" and "Shire" from [[Gollum]]. The Black Riders pursued [[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]] across the [[The Shire|Shire]] and Eriador. At [[Weathertop]], the Witch-king stabbed Frodo with a Morgul-blade. Frodo was saved by [[Elrond]]'s healing in [[Rivendell]], and the Nazgûl were swept away when their horses were caught by a flood at the Ford of Bruinen, summoned by Elrond's power.

== The Pelennor Fields ==
The Witch-king led [[Sauron]]'s assault on [[Minas Tirith]]. He broke the Great Gate of the city and confronted [[Gandalf]]. During the Battle of the [[Pelennor Fields]], the Witch-king attacked King [[Théoden]], killing his horse and crushing him beneath it. [[Éowyn]], disguised as the warrior Dernhelm, stood between them and declared: "I am no man." With the aid of [[Meriadoc Brandybuck|Merry]], who stabbed the Witch-king with a Barrow-blade (which broke the enchantment binding his undead flesh), Éowyn drove her sword into the wraith's face, destroying him.

The remaining Nazgûl were destroyed when the [[One Ring]] was cast into [[Mount Doom]], severing their link to [[Sauron]] and unmaking them.

== See Also ==
* [[Sauron]]
* [[One Ring]]
* [[Éowyn]]
* [[Théoden]]
* [[Rings of Power]]

[[Category:Characters]]
