'''Samwise Gamgee''', commonly known as '''Sam''', is a [[Hobbits|Hobbit]] of [[The Shire]] and the most loyal companion of [[Frodo Baggins]] throughout ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'' by [[J. R. R. Tolkien]]. Tolkien himself described Sam as the "chief hero" of the story.

== Early Life ==
Sam is the son of Hamfast "Gaffer" Gamgee, a gardener at [[Bag End]]. Sam grew up tending the gardens of [[Bilbo Baggins]] and [[Frodo Baggins]], and developed a deep love of Elven lore from listening to Bilbo's stories. He lives at 3 Bagshot Row in [[Hobbiton]], just below [[Bag End]].

== Role in the Fellowship ==
When [[Gandalf]] discovered Sam eavesdropping on his conversation with Frodo about the [[One Ring]], he assigned Sam to accompany Frodo as his companion. Sam joined [[Meriadoc Brandybuck|Merry]] and [[Peregrin Took|Pippin]] in following Frodo from [[The Shire]] to [[Rivendell]], where he became one of the nine members of the [[Fellowship of the Ring]].

Throughout the journey, Sam served as cook, porter, and steadfast friend. His practical, down-to-earth nature provided a counterweight to the Ring's growing influence on Frodo.

== Journey Through Mordor ==
After the breaking of the Fellowship at [[Amon Hen]], Sam insisted on following Frodo into [[Mordor]] alone. The two were joined by [[Gollum]], whom Sam deeply distrusted — rightly, as events proved.

When Frodo was paralysed by Shelob's sting at [[Cirith Ungol]], Sam took the [[One Ring]] and briefly bore it himself. He rescued Frodo from the tower of Cirith Ungol, fighting past Orc guards, and returned the Ring to Frodo. Even during the brief time he carried it, Sam resisted its temptation — the Ring showed him visions of turning all [[Mordor]] into a vast garden, but his hobbit sense told him that such grandiose dreams were nonsense.

== Carrying Frodo Up Mount Doom ==
On the final approach to [[Mount Doom]] across the barren plains of [[Mordor|Gorgoroth]], Frodo collapsed from exhaustion and the Ring's weight. Sam carried Frodo bodily up the slopes of the mountain, declaring: "I can't carry it for you, but I can carry you." This act is one of the most celebrated moments in the story, embodying the themes of friendship, loyalty, and endurance that define the work.

== After the War ==
Sam returned to [[The Shire]] and played a key role in the [[The Shire|Scouring of the Shire]]. He used the gift given to him by [[Galadriel]] — a box of soil from [[Lothlórien]] with a silver nut of a ''mallorn'' tree — to replant the Shire's damaged trees. The ''mallorn'' he planted in the Party Field became the only one in the land.

Sam married '''Rosie Cotton''' in T.A. 3020, and they had thirteen children. He was elected '''Mayor of the Shire''' seven consecutive times, serving for forty-nine years. He was also named one of the counsellors of the reunited kingdom by King [[Aragorn|Elessar]].

After Rosie's death in Fo.A. 61, Sam is said to have sailed to the [[Undying Lands]], the last of the Ring-bearers to do so.

== See Also ==
* [[Frodo Baggins]]
* [[Fellowship of the Ring]]
* [[The Shire]]
* [[One Ring]]

[[Category:Characters]]
[[Category:Hobbits]]
