'''Saruman''' (Quenya: "man of skill"), also known as '''Curunír''' ("the cunning one"), is a major antagonist in ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'' by [[J. R. R. Tolkien]]. Originally the greatest of the [[Istari]] (Wizards) sent to [[Middle-earth]], he was corrupted by his desire for power and knowledge, particularly through his study of [[Sauron]]'s methods.

== Origins as an Istar ==
Saruman was one of the five [[Istari]] — [[Istari|Maiar]] sent to [[Middle-earth]] by the Valar around T.A. 1000 to advise and assist the free peoples against [[Sauron]]. He was the eldest and most powerful of the order, given the title '''Saruman the White''' and appointed head of the White Council. His Maiar name was Curumo, and he was originally a servant of Aulë, like [[Sauron]] himself.

== Head of the Order ==
For centuries, Saruman was respected as the chief opponent of [[Sauron]]. He settled at [[Isengard]], the fortress of Orthanc in the Gap of Rohan, given to him by the Steward of [[Gondor]]. He became a deep student of ring-lore and the devices of [[Sauron]], and it was this study that began his corruption.

Saruman also possessed one of the ''palantíri'' (seeing-stones), through which he eventually made contact with [[Sauron]] via the stone of [[Mordor|Barad-dûr]]. Though Saruman believed he could outwit Sauron, he was gradually brought under the Dark Lord's influence.

== Corruption ==
Saruman's fall was driven by envy of [[Gandalf]] (whom the Valar had secretly favoured), desire for the [[One Ring]], and the belief that order could only be imposed through domination. He abandoned his mission to guide and began to seek power for himself. He bred armies, including the '''Uruk-hai''' — a new breed of [[Orcs]] larger and stronger than ordinary orcs, able to withstand sunlight.

He also developed a spy network and industrialised [[Isengard]], tearing down its ancient trees to fuel his war machines — an act that would bring the wrath of the [[Ents]].

== Isengard ==
From [[Isengard]], Saruman launched a war against [[Rohan]], sending his Uruk-hai to raid the kingdom and ultimately besieging [[Rohan|Helm's Deep]]. He imprisoned [[Gandalf]] atop the tower of Orthanc when Gandalf came seeking counsel, though Gandalf was rescued by the Eagle Gwaihir.

== Creating the Uruk-hai ==
Saruman's most feared creation was the Uruk-hai — large, powerful Orcs bred for war who could march in daylight and travel at great speed. A company of Uruk-hai captured [[Meriadoc Brandybuck|Merry]] and [[Peregrin Took|Pippin]] at [[Amon Hen]], though the hobbits escaped when the Uruk-hai were destroyed by the [[Rohan|Riders of Rohan]] at the edge of [[Fangorn]] Forest.

== Defeat ==
Saruman suffered a series of catastrophic reversals:
* His army was defeated at [[Rohan|Helm's Deep]] by the combined forces of [[Rohan]] and [[Gandalf]]'s reinforcements.
* The [[Ents]], led by [[Treebeard]], stormed [[Isengard]], destroying its war works and flooding the fortress.
* [[Gandalf]] broke Saruman's staff and expelled him from the order of the [[Istari]], stripping him of his title and power.

Saruman was imprisoned in Orthanc by [[Treebeard]] but was eventually released.

== The Scouring of the Shire ==
Saruman travelled to [[The Shire]], where he had already established agents and a pipe-weed trade. Under the alias "Sharkey," he took control, imposing petty tyranny, cutting down trees, and polluting the land. When [[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]], [[Samwise Gamgee|Sam]], [[Meriadoc Brandybuck|Merry]], and [[Peregrin Took|Pippin]] returned from the war, they rallied the hobbits and overthrew his rule.

Saruman was killed by his own servant, [[Wormtongue|Gríma Wormtongue]], who slit his throat. His spirit rose and was dissolved by a wind from the West, denied return to Valinor.

== See Also ==
* [[Gandalf]]
* [[Isengard]]
* [[Rohan]]
* [[The Shire]]

[[Category:Characters]]
[[Category:Wizards]]
[[Category:Istari]]
