'''Sauron''' (Quenya: "the Abhorred") is the primary antagonist of ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'' and much of the legendarium of [[J. R. R. Tolkien]]. Originally a [[Istari|Maia]] of great power, he became the Dark Lord of [[Mordor]] and the creator of the [[One Ring]].

== Origins as a Maia ==
Sauron was originally known as '''Mairon''' ("the Admirable"), one of the [[Istari|Maiar]] — powerful spirits who served the Valar (the angelic guardians of the world). He was a servant of Aulë, the Vala of smithcraft, which gave him great knowledge of making and shaping. His desire for order and perfection made him susceptible to the corruption of [[Morgoth]] (Melkor), the first Dark Lord, whom he joined as his chief lieutenant.

== Servant of Morgoth ==
Throughout the [[Middle-earth|First Age]], Sauron served [[Morgoth]] as his most trusted captain. He was a master of deception and sorcery. His stronghold was the fortress of Tol-in-Gaurhoth (the Isle of Werewolves), and he commanded legions of wolves and other dark creatures. After Morgoth's defeat in the War of Wrath, Sauron briefly repented but refused to submit to the judgment of the Valar and fled into hiding.

== The Rings of Power ==
In the [[Middle-earth|Second Age]], Sauron assumed a fair form and called himself '''Annatar''' ("Lord of Gifts"). He deceived the Elven-smiths of [[Eregion]], led by Celebrimbor, into forging the [[Rings of Power]]. Sauron distributed seven rings to the [[Dwarves|Dwarf]]-lords and nine to mortal Men, while secretly forging the [[One Ring]] in the fires of [[Mount Doom]] to control all the other Ring-bearers.

The nine mortal Men who received rings were gradually enslaved, becoming the [[Nazgûl]] — the Ringwraiths, Sauron's most feared servants.

== Downfall of Númenor ==
Sauron allowed himself to be captured by the Númenórean king Ar-Pharazôn and taken to the island kingdom as a prisoner. Through cunning and flattery, he corrupted the Númenóreans, eventually persuading the king to assault the [[Undying Lands]]. The Valar responded by destroying Númenor beneath the sea. Sauron's physical body was destroyed in the cataclysm, but his spirit returned to [[Mordor]], though he could never again assume a fair form.

== Return in the Third Age ==
Sauron spent the early [[Middle-earth|Third Age]] slowly regathering his strength. Around T.A. 1000, he established himself at Dol Guldur in southern [[Mirkwood]], disguised as "the Necromancer." He was driven out by the White Council (including [[Gandalf]] and [[Galadriel]]) in T.A. 2941 but returned openly to [[Mordor]], rebuilding [[Mordor|Barad-dûr]] and preparing for war.

By the time of the [[War of the Ring]], Sauron had amassed enormous armies of [[Orcs]], Trolls, Easterlings, and Haradrim. He existed as a vast, malevolent will — his physical manifestation was the Great Eye, lidless and wreathed in flame, gazing ceaselessly from [[Mordor|Barad-dûr]].

== Defeat ==
Sauron's strategy was undone by the quest of [[Frodo Baggins]] and [[Samwise Gamgee]] to carry the [[One Ring]] to [[Mount Doom]]. [[Aragorn]]'s diversionary attack at the [[Black Gate]] drew Sauron's attention while the hobbits crossed [[Mordor]]. When [[Gollum]] fell into the fire of Mount Doom with the Ring, Sauron was destroyed forever — his power, bound to the Ring, was unmade, and [[Mordor|Barad-dûr]] collapsed into ruin. His spirit rose as a vast shadow, blown away by a wind from the West, and was gone.

== See Also ==
* [[One Ring]]
* [[Mordor]]
* [[Nazgûl]]
* [[Rings of Power]]
* [[Morgoth]]

[[Category:Characters]]
