'''Théoden''', son of Thengel, is the King of [[Rohan]] during the [[War of the Ring]] in ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'' by [[J. R. R. Tolkien]]. His arc — from enfeebled puppet to heroic warrior-king — is one of the most celebrated character transformations in the story.

== Background ==
Théoden was born in T.A. 2948 and became the seventeenth King of [[Rohan]] in T.A. 2980. He was a strong and capable ruler in his youth. His son Théodred was his heir, and his sister Théodwyn's children — [[Éowyn]] and [[Éomer]] — were raised in his household after their parents' deaths.

== Saruman's Influence ==
In his later years, Théoden fell under the influence of [[Saruman]] through his counsellor '''Gríma Wormtongue'''. Wormtongue whispered despair and defeatism into the king's ear while secretly reporting to [[Saruman]] and possibly administering poison. Under this influence, Théoden aged prematurely, became passive and suspicious, and allowed [[Rohan]] to weaken while [[Saruman]]'s forces grew at [[Isengard]]. He banished [[Éomer]] and ignored the growing threat.

== Liberation by Gandalf ==
When [[Gandalf]], [[Aragorn]], [[Legolas]], and [[Gimli]] came to Meduseld in Edoras, Gandalf confronted Wormtongue and broke [[Saruman]]'s hold over Théoden. The transformation was dramatic — Théoden straightened, his eyes cleared, and he gripped his sword again. He expelled Wormtongue and resolved to lead his people against [[Saruman]].

Théoden's first grief upon awakening was learning that his son Théodred had been killed in battle at the Fords of Isen while the king lay in his enchanted stupor.

== Helm's Deep ==
Théoden led the people of [[Rohan]] to the fortress of Helm's Deep, where they withstood a night-long assault by [[Saruman]]'s army of Uruk-hai and Dunlendings. Though the situation seemed hopeless, Théoden rode out at dawn in a final charge, meeting [[Gandalf]] and [[Éomer]]'s reinforcements. The enemy was routed.

After the battle, Théoden rode to [[Isengard]], where he confronted [[Saruman]] in the tower of Orthanc. Saruman attempted to sway him with his enchanting voice, but Théoden rejected him, remembering what Saruman had done to him and his people.

== Ride to Gondor ==
When the Red Arrow came from [[Gondor]] calling for aid, Théoden honoured the ancient [[Rohan|Oath of Eorl]] and mustered the Rohirrim. He led six thousand riders on a desperate ride across hundreds of miles to [[Minas Tirith]].

== Death at the Pelennor Fields ==
At dawn, Théoden led the charge of the Rohirrim onto the [[Pelennor Fields]], breaking the siege of [[Minas Tirith]] in one of the most stirring passages in the book. He was described as "possessed" by the battle-fury of his ancestors, and his charge carried all before it.

The [[Nazgûl|Witch-king]] attacked Théoden on his fell beast, and Théoden's horse Snowmane was struck and fell, crushing the king beneath him. [[Éowyn]] and [[Meriadoc Brandybuck|Merry]] defended his body and destroyed the Witch-king. Théoden died on the field, having redeemed his kingship:

: "I go to my fathers. And even in their mighty company I shall not now be ashamed."

He was buried in the eighth mound of the kings of [[Rohan]] in Edoras, and ''simbelmynë'' (white flowers) grew upon his grave.

== See Also ==
* [[Rohan]]
* [[Éowyn]]
* [[Gandalf]]
* [[Saruman]]
* [[Minas Tirith]]

[[Category:Characters]]
