'''Éowyn''' is a noblewoman of [[Rohan]], the niece of King [[Théoden]], and one of the most celebrated heroes of the [[War of the Ring]] in ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'' by [[J. R. R. Tolkien]]. She is known as the '''Shieldmaiden of Rohan''' for her slaying of the [[Nazgûl|Witch-king]] at the Battle of the [[Pelennor Fields]].

== Background ==
Éowyn was born in T.A. 2995, the daughter of Théodwyn (sister of King [[Théoden]]) and Éomund, Marshal of the Mark. Both her parents died when she was young — her father was killed by Orcs, and her mother died of grief shortly after. Éowyn and her brother [[Éomer]] were raised in Théoden's household at Edoras.

== Longing for Glory ==
During [[Théoden]]'s decline under [[Saruman]]'s influence, Éowyn was left to care for an enfeebled king while watching [[Rohan]] crumble. She felt trapped — a woman of warrior spirit caged by duty and convention. She feared not death but "a cage," as she told [[Aragorn]]: "to stay behind bars, until use and old age accept them, and all chance of doing great deeds is gone beyond recall or desire."

Éowyn developed feelings for [[Aragorn]], seeing in him a path to glory and meaning. Aragorn recognised her worth but did not return her love, as he was pledged to [[Arwen]]. He gently told her that her duty lay with her people, which only deepened her despair.

== Disguise as Dernhelm ==
When [[Théoden]] rode to [[Gondor]]'s aid, he commanded Éowyn to remain behind and govern [[Rohan]]. Instead, she disguised herself as a male rider called '''Dernhelm''' and rode with the Rohirrim, carrying [[Meriadoc Brandybuck|Merry]] (who had also been told to stay behind) before her on her horse.

== Killing the Witch-king ==
At the Battle of the [[Pelennor Fields]], the [[Nazgûl|Witch-king]] attacked [[Théoden]], and his fell beast struck down the king's horse. Éowyn stood between the Witch-king and her fallen uncle. The Witch-king declared that no living man could hinder him. Éowyn removed her helm, revealing herself:

: "But no living man am I! You look upon a woman. Éowyn I am, Éomund's daughter. You stand between me and my lord and kin. Begone, if you be not deathless! For living or dark undead, I will smite you, if you touch him."

With [[Meriadoc Brandybuck|Merry]]'s aid — he stabbed the Witch-king from behind with a Barrow-blade, breaking the spell that held the wraith's undead form together — Éowyn drove her sword into the Witch-king's face, destroying him. The effort shattered her shield-arm and left her in a deathlike coma from the Black Breath.

== Healing in the Houses of Healing ==
Éowyn was brought to the Houses of Healing in [[Minas Tirith]], where [[Aragorn]] used the healing herb ''athelas'' (kingsfoil) and his royal lineage to call her back from the shadow. During her recovery, she met '''[[Faramir]]''', the wounded Steward of [[Gondor]], and they fell in love.

Faramir recognised that Éowyn's desire for death in battle had been born of despair, not true valour, and helped her find a new purpose. Éowyn chose to become a healer rather than a warrior:

: "I will be a shieldmaiden no longer, nor vie with the great Riders, nor take joy only in the songs of slaying. I will be a healer, and love all things that grow and are not barren."

== After the War ==
Éowyn married [[Faramir]] and became the Lady of Ithilien, the restored province east of [[Gondor]]. Together they helped rebuild the land that had been ravaged by war.

== See Also ==
* [[Théoden]]
* [[Rohan]]
* [[Nazgûl]]
* [[Faramir]]
* [[Minas Tirith]]

[[Category:Characters]]
